pkgs/sagemath-bliss/README.rst, before:

==============================================================================
 Sage: Open Source Mathematics Software: Graph (iso/auto)morphisms with bliss
==============================================================================

About SageMath
--------------

   "Creating a Viable Open Source Alternative to
    Magma, Maple, Mathematica, and MATLAB"

   Copyright (C) 2005-2024 The Sage Development Team

   https://www.sagemath.org

SageMath fully supports all major Linux distributions, recent versions of
macOS, and Windows (Windows Subsystem for Linux).

See https://doc.sagemath.org/html/en/installation/index.html
for general installation instructions.


About this pip-installable source distribution
----------------------------------------------

This pip-installable source distribution ``sagemath-bliss`` is a small
optional distribution for use with ``sagemath-standard``.

It provides a Cython interface to the ``bliss`` library for the purpose
of computing graph (iso/auto)morphisms.

Commit message:

Migrate bliss package to meson

pkgs/sagemath-bliss/README.rst, after:

==============================================================================
 SageMath: Graph (iso/auto)morphisms with bliss
==============================================================================

This distribution ``sagemath-bliss`` is a small
optional distribution for use with ``sagemath-standard``.

It provides a Cython interface to the 
`bliss <https://users.aalto.fi/~tjunttil/bliss/index.html>`_ library 
for the purpose of computing graph (iso/auto)morphisms.

Installation
------------

To install this package, you need to have SageMath and bliss installed.
Then you can install this package with the following command from the
Python environment where you have SageMath installed:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    $ pip install --no-build-isolation sagemath-bliss

About SageMath
--------------

   "Creating a Viable Open Source Alternative to
    Magma, Maple, Mathematica, and MATLAB"

   Copyright (C) 2005-2024 The Sage Development Team

   https://www.sagemath.org

SageMath fully supports all major Linux distributions, recent versions of
macOS, and Windows (via the Windows Subsystem for Linux).

See https://doc.sagemath.org/html/en/installation/index.html
for general installation instructions.
